# FiNe
AG FISK - FiNe – Factors influencing bird bycatch in the North-Atlantic
Bycatch of seabirds in fisheries is one of the main threats to seabird populations globally. Annually, thousands of birds are estimated to be killed in longline fisheries specifically (Anderson et al., 2011). Bycaught seabirds are attracted to the baited hooks of longline fishing gear, where they can get hooked and drown. Surface and plunge feeding species, particularly albatrosses, petrels, shearwaters, and gannets, are considered to be at higher risk of bycatch in longline fisheries. While considerable effort has been made to monitor and reduce seabird bycatch in longline fisheries in the southern hemisphere, bycatch in demersal longline fisheries in the North-Atlantic is less well studied meaning the scale and population impacts of bycatch remain largely unknown. Similarly, few mitigation studies have been carried out in the North-Atlantic and these have tended to be carried out in an ad hoc manner at either regional or local level rather than at larger multi-fishery levels and so the wide-scale applicability of any results is limited.    [GS1] 
Based on regional data from onboard observers, the northern fulmar seems to be the most frequent bycatch occurrence in longlines in offshore longline fisheries in the northeastern Atlantic (Kingston et al. 2023), but there appears to be considerable variation in bycatch rates between areas, seasons, and even individual vessels (Lewison et al., 2014). Statistical models found no obvious operational or environmental factors associated with elevated bycatch levels and, to date, little is known about which factors drive this variation. This has implications for the management of seabird bycatch in the demersal longline fisheries of the North Atlantic.

There are three objectives of the project. First, we aim to collate information to describe and characterise the demersal longline fisheries in the different countries, including improved identification of the métiers (gear and target species) operating in the North Atlantic. Then, we will explore the drivers of variation in seabird bycatch rates in demersal longline fisheries based on available literature and, complemented with data from various North-Atlantic longline fisheries. Finally, we will formalise the foundations for an North-Atlantic network of scientists working on longline bycatch to provide a collaborative and strategic approach to understanding, assessing and where necessary mitigating seabird bycatch across the North-Atlantic.

The overarching goal of FiNe is to create a network of experts in the North Atlantic-Arctic interface who are carrying out bycatch research, and involved in national and international bycatch management efforts, societal measure for sustainability, future research investment and science development. The potential themes of interests are related to sustainable resources management, ecosystem functioning, and biodiversity. Currently, coordination efforts conducted in the countries are fragmented, and there is a need for strengthening collaboration and data/knowledge sharing to be able to face future challenges related to changes in distribution and population size of seabirds, and pressure from ecolabeling and the public to reduce bycatch levels. Coordination, centralising and sharing of data and infrastructure will create synergies to maximise the efficiencies of the research institutes involved and the fishing industries in the participating countries.
FiNe will gather experts from multiple research institutes working on longline fisheries and seabird bycatch in the North Atlantic to develop and explore hypotheses surrounding the factors that could potentially explain variation in bycatch rates. Sharing of datasets and writing of manuscripts will be emphasised, as well as knowledge transfer, and higher education programs.
